Building containers (#19)
carpentries-incubator/docker-introduction: _episodes/05b-advanced-containers.md

---
title: "Creating More Complex Container Images"
teaching: 30
exercises: 30
questions:
- "How can I make more complex container images? "
objectives:
- "Explain how you can include files within Docker images when you build them."
- "Explain how you can access files on the Docker host from your Docker containers."
keypoints:
- You can include files from your Docker host into your Docker images by using the `COPY` instruction in your `Dockerfile`.
- Docker allows containers to read and write files from the Docker host.
---

In order to create and use your own containers, you may need more information than
our previous example. You may want to use files from outside the container, copy
those files into the container, and just generally learn a little bit about software
installation. This episode will cover these. Note that the examples will get gradually
more and more complex - most day-to-day use of containers can be accomplished
using the first 1-2 sections on this page.

## Using scripts and files from outside the container

In your shell, change to the `sum` folder in the `docker-intro` folder.
~~~

> $ cd ~/Desktop/docker-intro/sum

Reviewer: maybe `wget` these? or the whole folder when it is first introduced?

Reviewer: maybe `ls` too? to see the filenames.

Author: Added `ls`, not sure about `wget`.

Reviewer: I think `wget` is only needed if you want to download the docker-intro files you mention.  You can do it with clicking download instead.

~~~
{: .language-bash}

This folder has both a `Dockerfile` and a python script called `sum.py`. Let's say
we wanted to try running the script using our recently created `alpine-python`
container.

> ## Running containers
>
> What command would we use to run python from the `alpine-python` container?
{: .challenge}

If we try running the container and Python script, what happens?
~~~
$ docker run alice/alpine-python python sum.py
~~~
{: .language-bash}
~~~
python: can't open file 'sum.py': [Errno 2] No such file or directory
~~~
{: .output}

> ## No such file or directory
>
> What does the error message mean? Why might the Python inside the container
> not be able to find or open our script?
>
{: challenge}

The problem here is that the container and its file system is separate from our
host computer's file system. When the container runs, it can't see anything outside
itself, including any of the files on our computer. In order to use Python
(inside the container) and our script (outside the container, on our computer),
we need to create a link between the folder on our computer and the container.

> This link is called a "mount" and we can create it using an additional

Reviewer: Maybe we should compare this to "mount"ing or plugging in an external drive?

Reviewer: It might also be worth mentioning before this that the mount links the drives both ways. So new files you create in `/temp` will be immediately accessible outside the container and remain after you exit the container.  Not sure if that should go here or later in the lesson somewhere.

Author: Added, could use another read through.

Reviewer: Looks good to me!

option to `docker run`. We'll also use the variable `$PWD` which will substitute
in our current working directory. The option will look like this

`-v $PWD:/temp`

What this means is -- link my current folder with the container, and inside the
container, name the folder `/temp`

Let's try running the command now:
~~~
$ docker run -v $PWD:/temp alice/alpine-python python sum.py
~~~
{: .language-bash}

But we get the same error!
~~~
python: can't open file 'sum.py': [Errno 2] No such file or directory
~~~
{: .output}

This final piece is a bit tricky -- we really have to remember to put ourselves
inside the container. Where is the `sum.py` file? It's in the folder that's been
mapped to `/temp` -- so we need to include that in the path to the script. This
command should give us what we need:
~~~
$ docker run -v $PWD:/temp alice/alpine-python python /temp/sum.py
~~~
{: .language-bash}

> ## Exercise: Explore the script
>

> > What happens if you use the `docker run` command above

Reviewer: Can you add a solution here too?  Mostly because I have no idea what happens. 😆   Does the script take arguments?

Author: Yes. :) Should be obvious what happens (I hope)

>
> > ## Solution
> >
> > Here's a breakdown of each piece of the command above
> >
> > - `docker run`: use Docker to run a container
> > - `-v $PWD:/temp`: connect my current working directory (`$PWD`) as a folder
> > inside the container called `/temp`
> > - `alice/alpine-python`: name of the container to run
> > - `python /temp/sum.py`: what commands to run in the container
> >
> > More generally, every Docker command will have the form:
> > `docker [action] [docker options] [docker image] [command to run inside]
> >
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

> ## Exercise: Interactive jobs
>
> Try using the directory mount option but run the container interactively.
> Can you find the folder that's connected to your computer? What's inside?
>
> > ## Solution
> >
> > The docker command to run the container interactively is:
> > ~~~
> > $ docker run -v $PWD:/temp -it alice/alpine-python sh
> > ~~~
> > {: .language-bash}
> >
> > Once inside, you should be able to navigate to the `/temp` folder
> > and see that's contents are the same as the files on your computer:
> > ~~~
> > /# cd /temp
> > /# ls
> > ~~~
> > {: .language-bash}
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

> Being able to use files outside the container is very useful when you want to isolate

Reviewer: I find this paragraph a bit hard to read, esp the "isolate your software in a container" part for some reason.

```suggestion
Mounting a folder can be very useful when you want to run the software inside your container on many different input files.
In other situations, you may want to save or archive an authoritative version of your data by adding it to the container permanently.  That's what we will cover next.
```
Here is an attempt to reword that section.

your software in a container, but use it with many different inputs or scripts.
If you have a "final" version of your data, or want to create an authoritative version
of your work, you might want to put files into the container permanently. That's
what we'll cover next.

## Including personal scripts and data in a container

Our next project will be to add our own files to a container - something you
might want to do if you're sharing a finished analysis or just want to have

> an archived copy of everything. Let's assume that we've finished with our `sum.py`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
an archived copy of your entire analysis including the data. Let's assume that we've finished with our `sum.py`
```

that you want to publish or use as a record. Note that it's not necessarily a good idea
to put your scripts inside the container if you're constantly changing or editing them.
Then, referencing the scripts from outside the container is a good idea, as we
did in the previous section. You also want to think carefully about size -- if you
run `docker image ls` you'll see the size of each image all the way on the right of
the screen. The bigger your image becomes, the harder it will be to easily download.

> ## Copying alternatives
>
> Another trick for getting your own files into a container is by using the `RUN`
> keyword and downloading the files from the internet. For example, if your code
> is in a GitHub repository, you could include this statement in your Dockerfile
> to download the latest version every time you build the container:
>
> ~~~
> RUN git clone https://github.com/alice/mycode
> ~~~
>
> Similarly, the `wget` command can be used to download any file publicly available
> on the internet:
>
> ~~~
> RUN wget ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast/executables/blast+/2.10.0/ncbi-blast-2.10.0+-x64-linux.tar.gz
> ~~~
>
{: callout}

> ## More fancy `Dockerfile` options

Reviewer: Maybe this whole section should be a callout to indicate that it is optional for instructors?

Author: Hmmm. They could also be optional exercises. Maybe I'll just add optional to the title?

Reviewer: Sounds good.

> > - `python /temp/sum.py`: what commands to run in the container
> >
> > More generally, every Docker command will have the form:
> > `docker [action] [docker options] [docker image] [command to run inside]
> >
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

> ## Exercise: Interactive jobs
>
> Try using the directory mount option but run the container interactively.
> Can you find the folder that's connected to your computer? What's inside?
>
> > ## Solution
> >
> > The docker command to run the container interactively is:
> > ~~~
> > $ docker run -v $PWD:/temp -it alice/alpine-python sh
> > ~~~
> > {: .language-bash}
> >
> > Once inside, you should be able to navigate to the `/temp` folder
> > and see that's contents are the same as the files on your computer:
> > ~~~
> > /# cd /temp
> > /# ls
> > ~~~
> > {: .language-bash}
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

Mounting a folder can be very useful when you want to run the software inside your container on many different input files.
In other situations, you may want to save or archive an authoritative version of your data by adding it to the container permanently.  That's what we will cover next.

> your software in a container, but use it with many different inputs or scripts.

Reviewer: Think the merge kind failed here.  Maybe removing lines 162-165?
